# **202 - Digital Games Production**
## Navigation
- [Platforms and Audiences](#platforms-and-audiences)
- [Creating a Functional Demo](#creating-a-functional-demo)
- [Review](#review)
----
## Platforms and Audiences
### <font color="#7359b3">(I) - Researching and defining some key terms used in Games Development</font>
#### <u>Game Engine</u>
A game engine is a type of software framework designed to be used in video game development. They serve the purpose of laying out the framework for game design and development without needing to build the entire backend from scratch first or painstakingly hard-code every individual part of a game, reducing the labour required and making the process both more efficient and simpler. Game engines offer a number of tools and functions to assist in game development, such as rendering engines and collision detection, alongside providing platform abstraction that allow the same game to be made to run on multiple platforms.
#### <u>Prefab</u>
A prefab is something akin to a template for game objects in game development. They can contain game objects, with all their desired components, properties and property values, and child game objects, all in one reusable package that can then be used in multiple places and edited all at once rather than individually. Instead of placing 20 identical /assets individually in a scene, and then needing to manually edit each of them when a change is required, one can use a prefab instead and edit all 20 at once by editing the prefab itself, as well as still being able to override this and make exceptions later, if individually editing a particular asset is desired.
#### <u>Assets</u>
An asset essentially refers in shorthand to anything that goes into a video game. This can be a texture, object, environment, model, sound, VFX, script, character... /assets are the essential building blocks placed into game engines and used by developers to build into games, and the types of /assets used can therefore vastly change how the final product will look, feel, and play.
#### <u>Game Design Document</u>
Game design documents are a kind of design document for game design and development that exist to define and illustrate the core concepts and ideas behind a game project. They often cover as many aspects of a game as possible, including things such as the core gameplay and mechanics, visual style, storylines, what kinds of /assets will be needed, and the development schedule/plans for release. It's important to create a game design document before seriously beginning development on a project, in particular for games made by multiple people, each who may have their own, conflicting creative vision.
### <font color="#7359b3">(II) - Comparing various popular gaming platforms</font>
#### <u>PS4</u>
The PS4 is a gaming console developed by Sony. It offered immersive gaming experiences and a huge library of games; the console was extremely popular on release and remains so to this day, being one of the best-selling consoles of all time.

The hardware of the PS4 was one of its key selling points on release, being a dedicated gaming console and having impressive graphical capabilities and performance that still holds up well today. Additionally, having that capability at the price point of a home games console gave it incredible value and staying power as a staple console, despite no longer having the most impressive specs overall.

The PS4 has an expansive library of high quality exclusive games to play, including popular titles such as God of War, The Last of Us and Uncharted. Alongside exclusives, there is a wide range of other titles available on the console, coming to about 3300 in total; many of these are available as simple digital downloads rather than being solely physical, adding some accessibility but keeping options available for those who prefer physically owning games, something impossible on mobile.

The control scheme for the PS4 is quite typical for a home console, using its own DualShock 4 controllers, which offer the nuanced controls of both analog sticks and triggers, the immersive rumble feature that serves as its namesake, as well as a clickable touch-pad for both cursor movement and additional inputs. Despite the simple appearance, the quality and features of the controller add a lot to the PS4, though users may not like the light bar on the front of the controller due to its distracting glow. The PS4 has a number of additional features that give it utility besides gaming. With a PSN account, a PS4 can connect to the internet (wirelessly or through LAN), allowing the user to browse online and use media streaming sites/apps. Overall, the PS4 is a quite universal console, but has more value for those interested in a powerful console that works well for competitive gaming.
#### <u>Mobile Platforms</u>
Despite mobile operating systems (Android, iOS etc.) not being designed for gaming as a priority, the mobile gaming industry is extremely large, likely due to the sheer accessibility of mobile as a platform enabling it to draw a uniquely wide audience. Mobile devices are usually packed with other utilities and features already, being designed more for "everything" than they are "gaming", which is a great plus for those who don't want the inconvenience of needing a whole separate device just to play games. They are uniquely accessible in that not only are most mobile devices highly portable, but most people will already be carrying one around often, making the investment for mobile gaming practically non-existent in some cases.

Unfortunately, even expensive and high-end phones and tablets will struggle to compete with dedicated consoles and PC gaming in terms of graphical capabilities, cooling, and overall performance; with battery drain and overheating taken into account, this means that the mobile platform is better suited for games that aren't too hardware intensive. This is reflected quite clearly when looking at some of the most popular mobile games. A large portion of the mobile games market is casual, pick-up-and-play style games, being mostly free-to-play titles that make their profits from ads and in-app-purchases, though there's no shortage of more standard games, especially in recent years with the growing number of indie developers for the platform. The sheer volume of games available on mobile is impressive too, however, the prevalence of low-quality adware games that are made solely to generate revenue makes finding high quality games a lot harder unless they've gained popularity already; the "hidden gems" of mobile gaming are really quite hidden, and that can put off users who're looking specifically for such games.

Most mobile devices (and consequently, most games) are limited to one main input type, which is the touchscreen. However, some games and devices are also tentatively compatible with Bluetooth controllers such as the Dualshock 4 or Joy-cons, and with the gyroscope built-in on many devices, some limited motion controls are available; and this has even been used to create simple VR games. The touchscreen input is uniquely versatile, and is often used to its full potential by developers creating their own unique control schemes, though it's not suited at all for some games, namely games initially made for consoles or PC.

While mobile as a platform for gaming has a lot of potential, it may not be considered the best platform for hardcore or competitive gamers, as most mobile devices aren't designed for gaming, and the few that are offer quite little value when comparing price to performance. For more casual players, mobile is an obvious good choice however, offering few downsides if any, and being hands down the most convenient option for many.
#### <u>Nintendo Switch</u>
The Nintendo Switch is a games console developed by Nintendo, offering a unique spin on both handheld and home consoles that makes it stand out as one of a kind, earning its spot as the best selling modern console (as of 2023). What it lacks in performance, it makes up for in its great library of games and versatile design. The titular "hybrid console" design of the Switch means that it can act as both a home console and a handheld, being able to swap modes in a matter of seconds. This unique feature sets it apart from other consoles, as it can fill multiple roles while keeping the same games, saves, etc. This, as well as the Switch's support for online and local multiplayer as well as media streaming, gives the console a good quality and quantity of features.

The hardware of the Switch is far from as impressive as the standard modern home console, partially as a result of its compact design, though it's not definitively worse, or better than mobile, and would be more ideal for casual users who prefer reliability over high performance. Its own screen's resolution (720p) and TV output (1080p) are both lacking in comparison to the average phone or tablet, and it struggles performance-wise with a number of ports from other consoles. Unlike mobile, however, the Switch is built for games, and handles performance-heavy games a lot better, with significantly less overheating and the option to play docked, thus avoiding battery drain. Though it's not the console for flexing graphical fidelity or FPS, it's not at all bad, and its first-party titles are all perfectly optimised to work with what it has. Like the PS4, the Switch has no shortage of excellent exclusive games, with Nintendo's first-party titles on the console making efficient use of the hardware and each of the different control types, generally being well-received for their quality.

The game library of the Switch resembles a mix of both the mobile and PS4 libraries, with some mobile games being available on the platform, but with a vast selection of the more content-rich games you'd find on consoles. The Switch features both its own controllers, and a touch screen, making it the most flexible of the three in terms of control variety. The two Joy-cons provided with the console can be used as two separate controllers for multiplayer, attached to the console for handheld play, or placed in a controller grip to use as a single wireless controller. This degree and ease of choice is unique to the Switch, and greatly enhances play by enabling games to use the controllers in interesting ways. It also has some motion controls, which are mostly only capitalised on by Nintendo's own games, but are still a nice feature to have and when used well. Unfortunately, the Joy-cons don't have analog triggers or sticks, limiting the detail of control players can have, and there are issues with joystick drift that have earned them a reputation, however free repairs/replacements are thankfully offered for such cases.

The Nintendo Switch can be seen as a halfway-point between the other two gaming platforms here; a games console that has both the portability and convenience of mobile while keeping a large library of high-quality games like the PS4. While its appeal doesn't quite reach to the hyper-competitive or hyper-casual ends of the spectrum, who may not find value in the hybrid-design feature, it's ideal for anyone in between, even if one already has a home console/mobile device for gaming, and especially so for more social gamers or families due to the ease of local multiplayer.
### <font color="#7359b3">(III) - Describing the characteristics of four different game genres and giving examples of each</font>
#### <u>MMO</u>
MMO stands for Massive Multiplayer Online, and is a type of game that allows large numbers of players to play together in the same world. The game's genre can vary, but most MMOs will feature player interactions through combat/cooperation/strategy/chat features, provide regular updates with new content, and tend to have an emphasis on being somewhat open-world. Examples of MMOs include: FFXIV, World of Warcraft, Black Desert Online, Wizard101, and Old School Runescape.
#### <u>FPS</u>
FPS games, or first-person shooters, are just that-- they feature shooting as their core gameplay, with a first-person perspective. The genre is very simply defined and as such gives way to an incredible amount of diversity in how each game under this genre actually plays. A common aim with many FPS games, however, is to put the player directly in the action, lending well both to immersive shooters and those involving platforming or tight, precise controls. Some examples of FPS games are: Doom, Team Fortress 2, Prey, Half Life, and ULTRAKILL.
#### <u>Infinite Runner</u>
Infinite runners, or endless runners, are games that feature core gameplay based around infinitely generating levels that the player is pushed to constantly move forward through without a clear end point. These tend to be high score based and auto scrolling with linear design, often having only a single level that progresses in difficulty or changes appearance over time. Some infinite runners have no real progression besides increasing the player's knowledge/skill, while others take a roguelike-like approach, with score, experience or collected items used for upgrades that help players achieve higher scores. Examples of such games would include: Temple Run, Subway Surfers, Sonic Dash, Crossy Road, and Dinosaur Game.
#### <u>Open world/Sandbox</u>
Sandbox/Open world games are both defined by the types of player freedom each genre grants. In sandbox games, the player is free to do whatever they please with the tools and gameplay mechanics given to them; much like an actual sandbox, the game provides tools and the player decides how to use them. Open world, on the other hand, refers to games that give the player freedom to explore and progress in a typically expansive world. Thus, open world sandbox games are those which adhere to both genres simultaneously. This fusion of two genres is common enough that "sandbox" on its own is often already assumed to mean "open world sandbox", though the two are not inherent to each other. Some examples of sandbox and/or open world games are: Terraria, Minecraft, Rust, Garry's Mod, and Stardew Valley.
### <font color="#7359b3">(IV) - Describing what I think the target audience or demographic is for various games.</font>
#### <u>Kingdom Hearts III</u>
The target audience for Kingdom Hearts III most likely includes those who were already fans of the Kingdom Hearts franchise, of Disney characters, and/or of Square Enix games. This would also include people who have nostalgia relating to the other games, along with fans of the Action RPG genre it belongs to and who enjoy hack-and-slash gameplay; this being particularly true for younger people looking for games in the genre, due to its accessible E10+ rating.
#### <u>Overwatch</u>
Overwatch's target audience is fairly broad, being rated PEGI 12 and with both casual and competitive appeal. Fans of the FPS genre, and of the team-based PVP gameplay would be drawn to it for that, with there additionally being an esports scene and ranked matches to appeal to competitive FPS players, and a casual mode to appeal to players who prefer less intense gameplay. The interesting worldbuilding and diverse list of heroes also opens the game up to those who prefer games with established lore and characters to connect to the stories of.
#### <u>Dead Cells</u>
I think that Dead Cells' target audience would be more aimed towards people interested in the challenging skill-based gameplay and gradual progression of roguelike games, and those who enjoy the exploration elements found in Metroidvania games. Being a combination of those two genres, it has a distinct appeal and will be interesting to those looking for unique games, but is still recognisable and enjoyable to the fans of each genre. Additionally, it has appeal to fans of indie games, being known as an example of high-quality indie titles. It has a higher bar for entry, being rated PEGI 16, but despite the darker elements and higher difficulty, still contains humour and rewarding gameplay, which gives an element of accessibility for more casual players who just want to have fun with games.
## Creating a Functional Demo
### <font color="#7359b3">(I) - Making 3 of Unity's Create With Code courses, and recording a short playtest of each.</font>
(LINK) (OR SOMETHING) (YOUTUBE? MAYBE. BETTER THAN DRIVE)
### <font color="#7359b3">(II) - Writing a simple left-right player controller script in C# for Unity, and explaining how it works.</font>
```playerController

public class playerController : MonoBehaviour
{
   // Holds player speed and current input
   public float horizontalInput;
   public float speed = 10.0f;

   // Start is called before the first frame update
   void Start()
   {
   }

   // Update is called once per frame
   void Update()
   {
   // Moves the player based on horizontal input
   horizontalInput = Input.GetAxis("Horizontal");
   transform.Translate(Vector3.right * horizontalInput * Time.deltaTime * speed);
   }
```
## Review
### <font color="#7359b3">Self Evaluation</font>
#### <u>How easy/hard did you find it to produce the 3 ‘Create with Code’ projects, and why?</u>
Producing the Create with Code projects provided a challenge, but overall was not too difficult, as the instructions were clear and concise, and there were comments under each step that helped with bug fixing.
#### <u>Did you find it easy/hard to follow along with writing the code/scripts you needed to make these games work? Why?</u>
It was relatively simple to follow with the code and scripts as they were well designed for beginner use, though I had to come up with alternative solutions at times because some of the code didn't work correctly for me. Though this was challenging, it taught me more about the game engine and coding than I would have learned otherwise, and the final products all turned out well in the end because of it.
#### <u>If you could add any extra features (decoration, game mechanics) what would you have liked to add? And what skills do you think you would need in order to make this possible?</u>
In terms of extra features, I feel that I could have added to the games a little more in different ways; like making the first prototype either infinitely scroll or have an ending, to avoid flying into the void and adding more obstacle types in the third prototype. I think this is possible with simply reusing some of the skills I have already applied in this task to achieve this, as the third prototype has an infinitely scrolling background, and the second prototype has multiple types of animals that are randomly selected to spawn in.